If you're new to Tailwind, if you're like,
I've heard a lot about this Tailwind
thing, but I have never used it,
cool, welcome, let's do it.
Tailwind is a,
I won't go as far as to call it a,
they'll call it a framework,
that's a loaded term.
But it is definitely a set of tooling
that allows you to write what
is called utility-first classes.
And this is maybe partially
the controversial piece
that we'll deal with here today.
I am probably not as
staunch on some of the same
principles that I think
the Tailwind team is as well.
I'll bend the rules occasionally when
it behooves me, but you can see even
on the screenshot on the page the basic
vibe that we're getting here, right?
And so if you've kind of maybe in
the past favored semantic CSS,
where it's like, okay,
this is gonna be the blog post title.
Maybe it's BEM, where I've got blog,
underscore, underscore title, so on and
so forth.
And when I first used Tailwind, and
I was like, what is this, right,
I don't know about this.
But then I thought about it a little bit,
which is I am guilty of
the following move, right?
It's like I'm gonna start off fresh, I'm
gonna use semantic CSS, and it's gonna be
the blog title, and I have blog author,
but then you know what happens?
Look at that blog title.
My blog title is really
just some bold text,
maybe a little bit bigger than the rest,
maybe with an underline underneath it.
And the next thing you know,
I got something else,
maybe I got a page title somewhere else.
I'm like, all right, I got this style,
I'm gonna rewrite this over and
over again, right?
And so all of a sudden, your semantic
styles start to kind of crumble.
And it's really hard when you run a team
to kind of keep all of that in place,
too, because there is always the goals
of perfection that we all seek.
And then there is reality cuz there's an
outage or something along those lines or
some major thing that we have to get done.
And running a big codebase is a game of
bartering with reality a lot of the times.
But then there's also some very,
very practical pieces,
this idea of utility for CSS.
Tailwind is going out of its way
to make sure that it is helping
you to provide the smallest
bundle of CSS possible, right?
Let's say that I was a better
person than I am, right?
And I was super good at
writing all this semantic CSS,
where I was writing the same styles over
and over with different names, right?
Well, those are a bunch of classes that I
need to now ship in my codebase that all
do the exact same thing, right?
It'd be a lot easier just to
have a few classes of like,
make this extra large text, cuz that is
one class, right, where I can see that.
And then also, back in the day,
there was a lot of separation of concerns,
right?
I'm already writing JSX or Svelte or
whatever, I'm already writing markup in my
JavaScript to begin with, might as
well bring it all in together as well.
And so you get this very,
what might feel a little like,
you can kinda see it's going
off the screenshot here, right?
And that feels a little bit much.
But then in a lot of cases, it becomes
very ergonomic to be like, okay,
I'm looking at this thing,
I roughly know exactly what it does,
I don't have to jump back and
forth between two different files.
Or even if you're using something like Vue
or Svelte, where you can put the style
sheet in the same file, up and down that
file, and don't get me started on React.
And so having a lot of that in
place has been super powerful.
The one thing that I will kind
of mention is there's a page on
the site that is talking a lot
about this utility-first CSS.
And there's a little bit of extra
justification of, it's totally cool,
you're using probably a templating
language anyway, right?
And so in a lot of cases,
you will kind of wrap these things
into the components as you go along.
It goes a little bit into, and then you
have multicursor to edit a lot of styles
at the same time, I'm like, okay,
that's a little much there.
But I will say, even if your
initial sensibilities are like,
I don't like this,
I would implore you to give it a chance,
because I have to say,
that was my initial reaction.
And now, there's not a world where I
would start a project probably and
not use Tailwind as my first choice,
right?
Once you kind of get into the rhythm and
routine of it, the level of
productivity becomes incredible and
then you don't really want to go back.
And there's a bunch of really interesting
things to kinda notice even in this
little screenshot.
And we will explore all of this kind of,
and
I'm just trying to setting
the kind of scene.
Which is you've got some
syntax like this here,
which is just basically all of your
responsive design breakpoints.
You just write in a single line, it's not
like keeping track, I've had the style and
then I write the media
query somewhere else.
It's the actual ergonomics of
the flow become incredibly powerful
once you kinda get into the rhythm of it.
And I think that is part of
the selling point there as well.
And the cool thing is also that everything
in Tailwind is completely customizable.
It's not like certain other CSS
frameworks that have existed in the past,
where it's like, let's just say it,
let's just call it out,
you know when that site was built
with Bootstrap, you can smell it.
The nice part about Tailwind is that it
does come with a default theme, right?
But literally, everything in that
default theme is customizable, right?
From the color palette to the size of
the spacing, to the font sizes and
line spacing that they align up to,
everything is totally customizable, and
you can go tweak those things.
And the nice part is,
unless you're changing the actual units,
they ship, you look at that rounded-xl,
what if you decide you're gonna use
totally different t-shirt sizes?
Then yes, you do need to change that,
or the colors.
But generally speaking,
you could basically swap out the theme,
change the theme, and
completely reskin the app without having
to do really anything beyond that, right?
But if you are migrating from an existing
design system, maybe doesn't align
with Tailwind's, you can absolutely
customize it for everything you need.
Or if you're kinda doing contract work or
maybe some consulting,
you can kind of create a utility belt full
of utility classes, pun unintended, right?
And be able to reskin and restyle things
and become incredibly productive and
powerful as you go
through all these things.
I've used it across personal projects,
everything from a Next.js app to
a Svelte app, so on and so forth.
And generally speaking,
the value prop is absolutely there.
>> How much CSS do I need to know
before starting to use Tailwind?
>> All CSS you know is going to benefit
you, but how much CSS do you need to know?
In our time together,
I'm not going to assume too much.
When we get into some stuff with the grid,
having familiarity with it, trying to
learn how to do CSS grid in Tailwind and
also with CSS grid at the same time?
Sure, but I would say, generally speaking,
we're gonna take this from kind of
the first principles and build up.
So I think in our time together, right,
I don't think that there's much of
an expectation that you are a CSS wizard.
And so no, but
knowing all the weird ease and
peculiarity of CSS, obviously,
isn't gonna hurt, right?
>> Looking at all of these classes,
I'd assume that at a certain point,
you would take several of them and make a
higher order class of components and etc.
I'm assuming you're gonna get into this.
>> So I will get into it, I will.
It's like I've mentally prepared for
this question very much so, right?
The term I was using as I was preparing
for this is I will teach the controversy.
I kind of mentioned in the preamble
in the very beginning,
if you read the Tailwind docs,
you will see that they have a much more
stern stance on, this is fine,
everything's great.
There are ways to compose higher
order styles, and there's very much,
if you really need to, but
you probably don't need to.
I do it, right, I do it when it's useful.
I'll show you how I do it.
This is going to be the practical
introduction to Tailwind,
not the diehard version of it, right?
And so its gonna be sprinkled in with,
this is what they officially
say you should do, and
this is what I do because I have to,
[LAUGH] right?
And so we will walk that fine line,
and I am prepared for
a certain amount of,
really, that seems a lot.
But we will kind of get a feel, and
I'll show you the the patterns that I use.
Take what works, right, and
ignore what doesn't work,
kind of figure out where you wanna
go on that spectrum as well.
But I will show the things that I do
in my apps and in my day-to-day flow.
>> Do you use Tailwind and
a preprocessor together?
>> So by definition, if you use Tailwind,
you do use a pre-processor with it.
So for them, Tailwind, theoretically,
I think it supports both Lightning CSS and
PostCSS, but PostCSS is the kind
of most common way to use it.
By default, if you just kinda
go through the normal steps,
you will end up using it with PostCSS,
it is effectively a PostCSS plugin.
So yes, because I use it with PostCSS, but
PostCSS is also like the,
it's mostly CSS version.
There probably isn't a great
use case to use it with Saas or
something along those lines.
And you probably don't want to
because some of the value prop
of Tailwind is it uses this
library called PurgeCSS, right?
Whic effectively what it does is at
build time, it scans your codebase and
looks for what CSS classes
you're actually using, right?
And only includes those in
the final bundle, right?
And so part of the resistance, I think,
on the Tailwind side for creating some of
those higher-order classes is that all of
a sudden now these classes are referenced.
But there's not really a great way
to tell if then your higher-order
class is referenced.
I am personally okay with
the maybe 1% of unused styles that
might make it all the way out there, but
that is a lot of the logic and things.
And we'll kinda see a little bit of some
of the best practices around that, Mark.
>> How does this compare to MUI and
other libraries like that?
And then would you recommend
migrating to Tailwind?
>> I So that's a tricky question for
me to answer as somebody who's basically
only used Tailwind for
the last two and a half years, right?
There is definitely not a component
library or anything along those line,
right?
You don't get any kind of, there is
actually, if you would like to pay money,
there is a component library that you
can buy that has a bunch of prebuilt
components.
But for us at Temporal,
we have our own design system
that I've built with Tailwind.
So I can't really say, and it's better or
worse than MUI, cuz the depth of
experience I have in Tailwind versus I
have played around with the other ones but
not on the same level.